## Aligning foundation models on encoded synthetic omic data for patient stratification (IEEE ICDH 2025)

This folder contains code and config files associated with the IEEE ICDH 2025 paper titled [Aligning foundation models on encoded synthetic omic data for patient stratification](). 

### Data augmentation

The paper follows the data augmentation strategy described in the paper ["Phenotype driven data augmentation methods for transcriptomic data"](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article/5/1/vbaf124/8142420) to generate enough samples for LLM training. To reproduce the augmentation, please follow the steps described below:
1. Go to the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/PaccMann/transcriptomic_signature_sampling) of the original method. 
2. Switch to the branch ``ieee_icdh``.
3. Under ``scripts``, run the file ``augment_modgp_rnaseq.py`` with the appropriate file paths.

The data used for experiments in the paper can be found on [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15641421) (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15641421) in ``data.zip``. On unzipping the file, multiple numbered folders will appear. Each number corresponds to the seed that was used to generate the synthetic data. Each such folder is complete with train, validation, and test files including ```scaler.pkl``` and a ```label_map.json``` file used for mapping targets to tokens for LLM training. The names of the files are self explanatory and correspond to the naming used in ```MultiOmicsDataLoader``` class.  

### Generating ULTs for Transcriptomic data

To create a lookup table for transcriptomic data, the paper uses the ``UnicodeSeriesCompansionTransform`` class to first compress the patchified data, followed by sorted frequency mapping to unicode characters. 

The resulting lookup table from the paper can be found in ``lut-rna-42-series-p10cm1mu256.json``.

### LLM Training

The paper uses a pre-trained SmolLM-1.7B for fine-tuning on encoded transcriptomic data for colorectal cancer subtyping. The Trainer and evaluation arguments can be found in the ``config.yaml`` file. Make sure to modify the config file to update the ```data_dir```, ```output_dir```, and ```logging_path``` arguments before training.

For example, to run an experiment with data generated by seed 42, the ```data_dir``` argument should point to this folder. 

To run a training, simply pass "multiomics" as the ``dataset_name`` and pass *scripts/IEEE_ICDH_2025/config.yaml* as the ``train_args_path`` to the ``training_ult.py`` file as follows:

```console
poetry run scripts/python training_ult.py --dataset_name multiomics --train_args_path scripts/IEEE_ICDH_2025/config.yaml
```

### Evaluation

Functions to compute correlation between distances in the input space and encoded strong space can be found in ``feature_distance_correlation.py``. 

The results shown in the paper for each experimental repetition can be found on [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15641421) (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15641421) in ``results_mu256.zip``.   

